---
title: "Adaptation to the cervical environment is associated with increased antibiotic susceptibility in *Neisseria gonorrhoeae*"
last_modified_at: 2020-08-17
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - Projects
tags:
  - Neisseria gonorrhoeae
  - Antibiotic Resistance
  - GWAS
---

Gonorrhea is the second most commonly reported sexually transmitted infection in the United States, and rates have been rapidly climbing over the last decade. While antibiotic resistance is a major 
concern, as *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* has developed resistance to every antibiotic we’ve used to treat it, we also see reversions to susceptibility, and some isolates have minimum inhibitory concentrations
(MICs) lower than what we would predict given the resistance alleles they encode. Here we performed a genome wide association study using genomic data and MICs from 4,852 *N. gonorrhoeae* clinical isolates 
to identify loci contributing to antibiotic susceptibility.

In our GWAS, we identified known resistance determinants such as mutations in 23S rRNA for azithromycin, mosaic *penA* for ceftriaxone, and mutations in *gyrA* for ciprofloxacin. However, we also found
a 2bp deletion that causes a frameshift in *mtrC* that was associated with susceptibility to all three antibiotics. *mtrC* encodes a component of the Mtr efflux pump; overexpression of this pump is known 
to be associated with antibiotic resistance and has been shown to be have a fitness benefit in the mouse model of gonorrhea. However, the 2bp emerged many times throughout the phylogeny and was present in 
approximately 1 out of every 25 isolates in our dataset, suggesting that this mutation must be selected for in some environments.

We know that *N. gonorrhoeae* can infect multiple sites, including the cervix, urethra, rectum, and pharynx. Using the available patient metadata associated with our isolates, we looked for associations
between the presence of the *mtrC* loss of function mutations and sexual behavior or site of infection. We found that *mtrC* loss of function was overrepresented in isolates from heterosexual patients
and isolates from the cervix. We also found that loss of function mutations in the activator *mtrA* and in a component from another proton dependent efflux pump, *farA*, were also overrepresented
in cervical isolates. We hypothesize that environmental conditions in the cervix (e.g. low oxygen, low pH) lead to a fitness cost for expression of these pumps.


This project is now published in [Nature Communications](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-17980-1)!
